There is such a short window once you start successfully interviewing. If you have two places that you are interested in or a position in the pipeline you have to take a leap of faith to either eat the bird in hand or hope that the two in the bush are going to end up in your hand. 
Sometimes you gotta pass up the 1st showcase in the Price Is Right Showcase SHowdown to get the better one.

Along the same lines a company that is hiring is in the same boat. When have they sampled enough candidates to actually get at one that is a good fit for them? If the candidate is worth it how long are they on the market? By the time HR acts the person could be off the market all ready. How do you attract and get the best candidates while still providing growth momentum to your organization when searching for candidates. The company has to make a leap of faith or tighten its belt until a viable candidate shows up.

Survey job postings for the skills you are developing and compare that to what you are finding.  How do they stack up? Is the demand there? Is it a dying field or growing? Are the skills transferable to other areas?

I honestly feel that my personal projects where really the fly catcher that caught the passing empoyer.  It was also a way to fill in the skills that I aimed to get at Grad School but didn't.  In the long run it doesn't really matter how you got the skills that you desired. It just matters that you got them in the end.


I feel like one of the reasons that working for yourself is so fun is that there is no expectation to live up to.  You KNOW that you don't know something so you go to seek it out instead of trying to act like you know more than you do so that you meet their expectations or you try to pretend like you know as much as you think they want you to know. Regardless there isn't that pressure when you are exploring new ground and searching and exploring.


2012-09-09 All things are relative. All you need to do is look better than the next guy. You have to have a certain level of competency but other than that you just have to not be as goofy and weird as the next guy.  You have to be more of a person with skills and not some introverted engineer.
Tech questions are their to expand your knowledge. The tech questions arise form the skills they want a candidate to have.
Algorithm optimizaiton
Values of  education: how (if) you use it and what it leads you to learn or what you then know you want to learn
MBA: to evaluate companies and how they are run
Law School: for real estate deals.
Goals:
-grow in skill level & skill set
-learn new languages so have the best tools to most easily complete a task
-python perl php databases
-learning other proggramming languages to see what they offer
-linux & what you can really do with a computer

Direction of career:
I don't really see myself in management. I can see it at some point where I know so much about the direction of a project and what *has* to be done but I don't have the time to do that task. Then possilby manage the group since have knowledge of all aspects of what needs to go on to achieve. In similar vein can see being technical lead, head projects.
I like a bit of HW & SW (lean to SW tho) to do a bit of hacking of the two as exercise to learn about them & offer bit of relevance to learning process.

Mon Aug  5 15:39:28 EDT 2013
Analyze your resume/elevator pitch for any thing that could be construed negatively or used against you. 

Reason to leave current job: was tired of it. was slated for js development but then just saw myself being a monkey. wanted to get out before lost edge. Didn't see any other opp that I really liked or wanted inside teh company. 

Reason to leave current job (that isn't 100% true or false either) is to say that you were exposed to new possibilities and that you went ot further pursue them. Never state that you left bc they weren't your fit or didn't like them etc. ---->>>>Don't give them ammunition to NOT hire you. 

