Tue Aug 12 11:07:37 EDT 2014
These questions I received when serving as a reference for Adam Ewing. The interview took about 15minutes
What is the length of time you have known him. Stated I had worked closely for 1yr and known him for 2yrs.
I was asked to describe the type of work I(we) was currently working on. This was under the umbrella of what is the culture. I stated that we were working on our next generation software in javascript such that mobile users and web based users could access it.
I was asked if we were a Waterfall environment. I wasn't familiar with that term and she then said is it Waterfall or Agile. I winged it saying we were a freeform place. (I don't think this was a critical question so I wasn't worried about botching it.) I tried to talk about Jira as our task management software and people being given tasks on Jira and then just knocking them off. (Mark Ziegler mentioned that we are Waterfall that towards the end turns into a death spiral.)
Does he do front end? (Adam stated that he thought she was trying to confirm that he really did do what he stated he worked on in his resume.) I stated that he did sorta do front end work and taht we are given a design and work off a template to get it to match the design.
She asked what technology we use and are competent at. I stated we write javascript adn use MS Visual Studio. I spoke of Adam coming from a C++ background and being thrown in a C# project. I stated that he picked things up as he had moved through the various languages and did fine. She specifically asked about C# and XML. That's when I mentioned his background. I tried to state that his server editor was in C# and used xml.  I'm not sure if I hinted at using the browser to debug. 
She asked me to rank him on his skillset from 1-10. I stated he was an 8 and spoke only knowing of his work on JS and stating I was giving him an 8 because he was still learning the ins and outs of the language and its gotchas.
I was asked to speak of his non-technical skills. I stated that he was willing to tell people 'no' in a meeting and not unwilling to stick his neck out. I stated that he was one of the more social engineers and a good communicator keeping Dave abreast of his progress etc.
I hinted at him being in the situation where he had to talk to other engineers and collaborate and communicate to produce an end product. I was hinitng at his work with Ken on profibus there although spared her the details. I did later on hint at him still being professional when having a tough time communicating or working with certain people (i.e. ken).
I stated that he was vital enough and competent to be sent to the Harbor Freight site.
She asked if we worked with Project Managers and BA. I'm stated that as teh site goes live we would work with those but currently as certain parts of our product were being completed, we were working with QA and knocking off bugs provided by them.
What is his best skill? I kinda just reiterated that he picked up js quickly and that he has firm programming fundamentals and a good communicator. I may have provided the additional details like the harbor freight visit or the collaboration with Ken on profibus as further examples of his character. 
I was also specifically asked if there were any attendance issues with him. I kinda laughed and said no and tried to brush that question aside in a way just because inside all I could think of was Conard. 


