Sell me on your company.
Why should I work here instead of McDonalds? McDonald's lets you get a free meal!
What was the last good book you read? What drew you to read that book?
What's on your nightstand? What do you decorate your home with?
What do you spend your free time on? What are your hobbies?
Mac or PC?
Which class do you wish you had paid more attention to in school (HS colllege whatev)?
What skill would help you be more proficient (effective) at your job?
What is the ideal skill set for this position?
If money was not an issue what would you do?
Where do you see yoruself in 5 years?
Where did you see yourself 5 years ago?

Where did you go to school?
What was your major/minor? Are you happy with this decision?
What is the best part of your degree? Worst?
Are the engineering jobs you've performed measured up to what you thought you would be doing when you first started down the engineering path?
Did your education prepare you for the jobs you have undertaken? How so?

What is the most annoying part of your job?
How much time of your day is spent doing work (writing code) vs doing paperwork (emails, documentation-->kinda goes w writing code, answering phone)

What organizations were you involved in in HS/ college?
Would you do anything differently? Why? (is it because unhappy or cuz screwed up?)
Or possibly a better angle: If you were to coach yourself going through college what advice would you give?
What are you involved in now?


NOTE:Any job you ask them you should be prepared to answer.
NOTE:Always follow up with WHY? Its not so much the decision but the reason behind the decision that you glean info from.


What is cool about your job?
What gets you excited?
What gets you out of bed in the morning?
Is that what your job is?
If not then why aren't you doing it?


Belcan AETD:
How often do projects change? Do they ever change?
How diversified is the client base?
The company provides services to multiple industry areas. What area or areas, specifically, would I be working in?
What advantage is there of working for this outsourcing company vs. the company itself?
If I don't like the position are there other opportunities where I could be used? -->Don't use this one.
If I was interested in work that was going on in other areas, would I be able to switch positions?
When was your last raise?
Are you happy at your position? 
Do you enjoy working?
Do you like your coworkers?
Do you fraternize with coworkers outside of work?
Are there work sponsored social activities? Or even social activities of a group from work?
Are the meetings that are held typically a good use of peoples time or a waste of it? Why? Why haven't they been changed?

What is the best part / highlights of working here?
What is the worst part/ lowlights of working here?

Why was I selected for the interview? What stood out on my resume?

Is the company privately or publicly owned? Who are the owners?
Your company has recently been bought by a private equity group. What changes are in store?

Who will I work for?
Travel involved?
What if I don't like job? Other positions w/i company?
HOw long do projects last?
Why work for you and not another company?
Sell me to work for your company

Thngs to Take to interview:
extra resumes (sometimes they get garbled after going through successive sites,hr etc)
binder
notes
water
pen gum
things to talk about, quiz the people you'll work with to get a feel for them and how well you'll work with them.
